---
layout: post
title: LC 670. Maximum Swap
categories: [medium, arrays, facebook]
author: Sarthak Sehgal
---
# Question
Given a non-negative integer, you could swap two digits at most once to get the maximum valued number. Return the maximum valued number you could get.

```
--Example--
Input: 2736
Output: 7236
Explanation: Swap the number 2 and the number 7.
```

# Solution
To make the resulting number biggest after one swap, we have to find the leftmost (most significant) digit which can be swapped. We would only want to swap a digit if there is a digit to the right of it which is greater than it. Consider the following numbers:
1. 987: any swap will make the number smaller than before as there is no such digit which has a larger digit on right
2. 897: swap 8 and 9
3. 6790: This case gives us some more insight into the solution. There are 2 digits greater than 6 on the right of it - 7 and 9. Clearly, a number starting with 9 is greater than a number starting with 7. So we only want to swap the digit with the maximum number to its right. Hence, swap 6 and 9.
4. 56949: Here, we have two option for swapping 5 with 9. The numbers will be 96549 and 96945. Clearly the latter number is bigger. This tells us that we want to swap digit 5 with the least significant occurrence of digit 9.
5. 9867: swap 6 and 7

Algorithm:
1. Start from the rightmost digit of the number.
2. Keep track of the least significant occurrence of the maximum number encountered, maxNum.
3. For each number, num, encountered, three cases:
     - num > maxNum: update maxNum = num
     - num < maxNum: this num can be swapped with the maxNum. We keep track of this using leftIdx and rightIdx (see code below)
     - num = maxNum: do nothing as we only require the least significant occurrence of maxNum
4. Swap the numbers (using leftIdx and rightIdx in code below)

```
int maximumSwap(int num) {
    string temp = to_string(num);
    int maxIdx, maxNum = 0, leftIdx=-1, rightIdx;
    
    for (int i = temp.size()-1; i>=0; i--) {
        int t = temp[i]-'0';
        if (t > maxNum) {
            maxNum = t;
            maxIdx = i;
        } else if (t < maxNum) {
            leftIdx = i;
            rightIdx = maxIdx;
        }
    }

    if (leftIdx == -1)
        return num;
    
    swap(temp[leftIdx], temp[rightIdx]);
    return stoi(temp);
}
```
Time complexity: O(n) where n is the number of digits in the number  
Space complexity: O(1) as max number of digits = 8 as per constraint